[music]
>> From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
This is The Daily.
Another [music] Epstein files dumped
today, and not just a dump, it was a
blizzard of files. [music] More than 3
million pages are now being posted to
the Justice Department [music] website.
The latest government release of
documents related to Jeffrey Epstein,
[music]
the single largest release so far, has
revealed the depth and intensity of his
relationship with the global elite long
after he became [music] a sex offender.
Some of the names mentioned in the files
dumped today: Bill Gates, Elon Musk, and
Steve Bannon. Peter Mandelson, a former
senior power broker for the governing
British Labour Party, and an
ex-ambassador to the US. Exposing
intimate communications with the world's
most powerful business [music] leaders.
Dr. Peter Attia, the celebrity longevity
influencer, appears in the files more
than 1,700 [music]
times. In 2015, Attia wrote, "The
biggest problem with becoming friends
with you, the life you lead is so
outrageous, and yet I cannot tell
[music] a soul." Top government
officials, prestigious academics, and
renowned experts. Some of the people,
Noam Chomsky, that was like the deal
breaker for me. Noam Chomsky, Deepak,
Deepak Chopra.
>> [music]
>> And in many cases, contradicting years
of their careful denials about their
closeness to [music] Epstein. This is
not the end of the Epstein case. This is
just maybe the end of the beginning, but
this is actually going to drag on for
years as people sort through the
documents and connect the dots.
Today,
as the fallout [music] from the new
documents ricochets across the globe, I
gathered three of my colleagues, Deborah
Cayman, Nick Confessore, and Matt
Goldstein, to talk through [music]
what they found.
It's Tuesday,
>> [music]
>> February 10th.
Deborah, Nick, Matt, thank you to the
three of you for being here. Thanks for
having us. Thank you. Good to be here.
All three of you have spent the past
week or so reading through hundreds,
maybe even thousands, of emails from the
latest release of Epstein documents.
And I want us to begin the conversation
with the release itself, the scope of
what the government has published, why
it's published it now, and what's
different about these documents from
what was released
in the previous batches. So, Deborah,
can you just start right there? Yeah, I
mean, the thing that's most noteworthy
about this document release is its sheer
size. We're talking about more than 3
million pages of documents. There's also
a lot of photos, a lot of videos.
In tandem with its size is the amount of
chaos that came with this rollout.
>> Mhm.
The release itself was more than a month
after the government's self-imposed
deadline, and there were a lot of things
that went wrong with this release. There
were a lot of unredacted names of
victims that never should have made it
into the public, and they did. There
were images of women in the nude that
The New York Times found and flagged the
Justice Department that then had to be
pulled back. So, in addition to the fact
that it's just so much material to comb
through,
in that combing, there's been a lot of
things that never should have been
found. And Nick, 3 million pages
strongly suggests that we are just
beginning to wrap our heads and our arms
around what's
here.
Absolutely. I mean, look, if we had 50
reporters reading 500 documents a day,
and it would take us 4 months to get
through all the documents.
>> Wow. And that's just to read them. To
make sense of them is actually a lot of
work because you have to cross-reference
who's being referred to. You can
sometimes figure out who's been redacted
by looking at other emails with similar
information. It's a lot of work, but I
think we'll be seeing
the fruits of this exposure, all this
information for months. Matt, what time
period do these 3 million pages cover
and where does that time period line up
with our overall understanding of the
Epstein story and his criminality? It
lines up in theory going back to the
initial investigation in Florida in 2005
and then all the way through 2019.
But what's important is what you're
seeing here is not just things that were
directly related to the investigation.
It's anything that was on his computer.
So when they grabbed his computers and
his servers,
that's why you're seeing a lot of emails
and financial records that wouldn't be
directly related to the investigation,
but they're related to his life. So we
should think of these documents
as capturing the point at which Jeffrey
Epstein is absolutely an established
public figure and one whose
behavior is acknowledged to be
very problematic. Yeah, yeah. Anything
after 2009 when he's already pled guilty
in Florida and he's had to register as a
sex offender. Anyone who's coming into
contact with him, they may not know all
the details, but they know they're
dealing with a registered sex offender.
Got you. Okay, that is helpful context.
I want to explain to listeners we asked
the three of you in preparation for this
conversation to think about themes that
you identified in the documents that
you've gone through and to bring us
examples that illustrate those themes.
And so I want to turn to that now.
Nick, in terms of the themes, let's
start with you and the most important
people in this story, the women, the
victims
of Epstein's behavior
and the system that he created. I think
for a lot of readers and listeners, the
women have been somewhat invisible,
right? Because they're victims of sexual
trafficking or abuse in many cases. We
don't often see them in their own words.
And what we see in these documents is
his correspondence with many of the
women he was trying to bring into his
orbit. As soon as he got out of jail in
2009 and possibly before, he was
basically building or expanding a
virtual harem, a pipeline of young women
in their late teens and early 20s who
were mostly from Eastern Europe and
Russia. He had scouts roving around
these places to find him women. And
every time he found a woman, he would
ask them to find him more women.
And so you might ask, "Okay, so why do
these women comply?"
The answer is that he had money and
influence and they usually had none.
He bought them plane tickets.
He provided them apartments. He offered
to pay for college or dental school. He
sent them to doctors or plastic
surgeons. And most of all, he dangled a
sense of opportunity and security.
He had a place for them to stay. He had
people for them to meet. He would make
introductions to modeling agencies or
producers or rich men. And we can see in
these emails these varying levels of
comfort on the part of the women. Some
of them
seem to take the arrangement at face
value. They're trading sex for money or
security or opportunity. Well, then give
us an example that demonstrates
Epstein's exploitation of these women's
circumstances. So here we have an
example. I'm not going to name her here
on the air, but she's a woman who has a
relationship with him that goes some
ways back. And in October 2011,
we are seeing sort of an end point in
the relationship. She's had it with him.
She's had it because, according to her,
she realizes that really his girlfriend.
In this email, she's saying she spends
all her time with him. She doesn't
communicate with anybody else. She
doesn't see her friends or go on
vacations. She dresses like he tells her
to. She styles her hair like he tells
her to. She has sex with him when he
wants, massages when he wants, but she's
not getting what she thought she was
promised in return. And she's furious
and she feels betrayed. She's saying,
"I'm fed up with I'm fed up. I've been
used. You promised me to organize
appointments. This is probably Eastern
European or Russian with a doctor. You
promised me to introduce to
photographers, to some people from
Victoria's Secret, to some celebrity.
Words stayed words."
Right? She's calling him on his
promises. And how does he respond?
There's a phenomenon called DARVO in
psychology and abusive psychology where
the abuser sort of reverses the
psychology and makes himself the victim
and his victim the aggressor. And that's
what he does here.
He says, "I am and I have been a friend.
I sent you to Moscow, but you cannot lie
to me and you lied to me. You lied to me
again. So, I will never help you ever
again."
So, in this one email, we really see how
Epstein controls these women and their
lives,
incentivizes them with promises that
he's going to deliver something
in order to extract what he's getting in
return,
and then it seems in some sense doesn't
really deliver it and then when he's
held to account, turns things around on
them. That's right. He makes himself in
to the victim. And we see this
repeatedly in these emails. I've seen
similar exchanges throughout the emails.
And along with that, Nick, you often
find
part of the abuses that it goes on for
many years after the women are even sort
of essentially discarded by Epstein. And
because they're so broken down and felt
they had to depend on him, they will try
to come back. And you'll see emails
where these women will say, "I want to
come back." And his first response will
be, "Send nudes." I mean, it's this curt
kind of response.
>> Send nudes.
>> Right. Over and over again. And then
sometimes they'll send something, and
they'll say, "Not sexy enough." It's so
dismissive of these women as basically
purely being objects for him.
Matt, the question that always comes up,
and I think because Nick just described
this dynamic with women, it's the right
time to ask it, is do these new
documents shed any light on the question
of whether or not Jeffrey Epstein ran a
pedophilic ring that trafficked underage
girls to those around him?
In short, the answer is no.
Basically, the 14- and 15- and
16-year-old girls that we've heard about
were largely recruited for him. There's
nothing that's come up that really
indicate that those same girls were
being trafficked at the time to any
other men. And prosecutors took a look
at that in 2019 when he was arrested,
and they basically ruled that out. And
it's even a memo that's contained in
this latest batch of documents where
they said what they looked at and what
they did not find was evidence of the
pedophile ring. But what's important to
understand, again,
the first time he went to jail in the
mid-late 2000s, it's on charges that he
is soliciting underage girls to get
massages.
And when he gets out of jail, he appears
to change tactics. He seems to decide
he's going to be more careful about the
law. What we see is a form of
trafficking after he gets out of prison
that relies mostly on women who were a
bit older, 18- and 19-year-old women
from Eastern Europe than the victims we
know about from before he died. I mean,
they were a bit older, but they were
still equally vulnerable, just in a
different way, with a different legal
definition. And that's what these emails
are so stunning, the vulnerability and
the neediness and the disparity in power
is very, very clear.
Deborah, I want to stay with you for a
minute. What lots of people who look at
these emails end up seeing
is behavior that on paper would seem to
make Jeffrey Epstein toxic. That's on
top of the fact that he's already been
in jail.
>> Yes. And yet, he's kind of a magnet for
the most powerful people in the world.
We see that time and time again in this
latest batch of documents.
You told us that these new emails end up
illustrating a how and why these
powerful people are drawn closer to him
even as he becomes a more toxic figure.
So, can you just walk us through that?
Yeah, sure. I mean, one of the things
that's so stunning about Jeffrey Epstein
as a character is the way that he
collected power. He collected influence.
He curated it in his life and he created
access to these spaces for other
powerful influential people and he
traded access as like this networking
currency. And something that really
became apparent to me in this latest
document dump because there are so many
emails is the intense vulnerability and
intimacy that people really fall into
when they're communicating with him.
Jeffrey Epstein was a person that they
could open up to. They could bare their
soul to in some ways and that in itself
is extremely seductive. It's really
stunning when you read these emails to
see these people whose names are so
recognizable and they're people who have
so much power and so much money be so
vulnerable and human. Give us some
examples of that from these documents.
Yeah, so I was reading a couple. There
was one from the guru Deepak Chopra and
he and Jeffrey Epstein were trading
these really intense questions and
Deepak said to Jeffrey Epstein, "How can
I be sure that I'm eternal?"
I mean, he's literally asking him the
question about the meaning of life. Um
there were a couple from the former
Prince Andrew whose entire
life and career and reputation has been
brought down by his association with
Jeffrey Epstein where he opens up about
the restraints of royal life and how
difficult it can be to be a royal.
And the person that he's opening up to
is not his therapist, it's not a family
member, it's Jeffrey Epstein. In another
email, Jeffrey Epstein is arranging for
Prince Andrew, or the former Prince
Andrew, to meet a woman. And he tells
him that she's 26, Russian, clever,
beautiful, trustworthy. And he responds
and he sounds kind of like a high school
boy with a crush. He says, "What have
you told her about me and have you given
her my email?" And there's just so much
raw vulnerability in that response. And
it becomes very clear that this too was
part of Jeffrey Epstein's power, the way
that he hooked people in and made them
feel safe enough to show their most
intimate parts to him.
>> How do you make sense of it? I mean,
what specifically is it
about the way Epstein operates that
prompts these powerful men,
and to some degree women, to be this
vulnerable in his midst? And especially
in these communications. I mean, it's a
great question and maybe Matt and Nick
also have a response cuz it's definitely
not his responses in the emails. But
it's Why not?
>> Well, what's staggering is in many of
these emails, people are unburdening
their souls and Jeffrey Epstein's
responses are four or five words riddled
with typos. And that's it. He's also
sort of plays the role of the bad boy
friend for a lot of these men that they
can say things that they can't say in
polite company, things that they can't
say to their friends, that they can't
say to their wives, to their partners.
It's things that they would never say to
their They would not want to be heard
saying for whatever reason since Epstein
has held himself out as this guy who's
like, "I go against all the rules." And
he invites them into their world and
that's why they feel they can open up
and say a lot of these things that they
would never say otherwise.
>> Hm. He's providing an escape and a kind
of amoral space in which to escape to.
That's right. He's a con man who has a
harem.
And he's playing these two things off of
each other.
The women are bringing in these
middle-aged men who are powerful in
their own spheres. They're powerful in
Hollywood or high finance. Or the royal
family. Or the royal family. But he has
girls, as he calls them. He has women
everywhere he goes. He's surrounded by
19-year-old blonds. And he's using the
powerful people
to bring in the women. Right? He's
saying, "I can connect you."
So he's a connector and a con man and an
abuser all at once.
This is an example of his network. So
there's one email. It's a proposed guest
list for a Yom Kippur dinner. In 2010,
the year after he gets out of prison.
Right. Here again, the timeline's
important. Now, this is only his
proposed guest list. I could not find
documents that confirm who actually
attended. But this is who he sought to
invite. And this is
>> his Is that his home? At his home in the
Upper East Side in his famous fabulous
mansion.
And we know that in general, he got
folks over who he wanted to over the
course of his life.
So here we have Mort Zuckerman, the
publisher and developer. The
billionaires Leon Black and Len
Blavatnik. Graydon Carter, the editor of
Vanity Fair. The designers Tom Ford and
Vera Wang. Wow. Charlie Rose and Harvey
Weinstein. Men who in the future will be
accused of sexual misconduct.
>> Yeah, Julian Schnabel, the artist. Tommy
Mottola, the record producer. Wow. And
the list is is 40 people long. So he
could bring these people in a room
and then take pictures with them. And
remember, in his Upper East Side
townhouse, on that credenza,
pictures of him with all these famous
people. And so if you are an 18-year-old
Russian model and come to his house and
you walk past that credenza,
you see Donald Trump,
Mohammed bin Salman,
Woody Allen,
Bill Clinton. Wow. You see all these
famous people in grip and grins
with your host and you think he's
powerful, he can help me.
And you might also think he's powerful,
he can hurt me if I step out of line.
Matt, I want to pick up on something
Nick just said about the power that
Epstein seemingly held over these
powerful people. This is a concept that
you have been looking at specifically,
the way he signaled to people in these
documents
that he had something on them. Yeah,
[snorts] so one of the what I call the
myths of Epstein is that he had a
blackmail operation to Mhm. There's no
real evidence of that that he was
blackmailing people. But for better or
worse, let's call it compromat. And it
was basically that he took the things
that people were telling them and also
from the work he was doing for some of
them, he would glean their secrets. And
his whole modus operandi was to sort of
at some point maybe someone was not
doing what he wanted them to do
>> Or paying him what he wanted him to pay.
>> paying him what he wanted or threatening
to stop seeing him. He would remind them
in just like I'll always be your best
friend. I'll never tell anything bad
about you to anyone. He also had this
weird thing where he wrote a lot of
memos to himself. We don't know how much
of this was actually always delivered to
the recipient. But there's one to Bill
Gates where he talks about
the
>> the illicit trysts that I know about and
also we don't want Melinda to know about
these things. Gates' ex-wife. You know,
there's messages about Leon
>> down black who was one of his big
benefactors in the later years.
>> Billionaire businessman.
>> Yeah. He talks about how maybe Leon
should get a divorce. And then also Les
Wexner who was head of Victoria's Secret
at the time who basically is where
Epstein had got most of his money.
Wexner famously cut him off in 2007
after he he got he's going to jail.
Epstein sort of never really got over
that because he I think there was a very
long relationship there and there's this
letter we found. We're not sure again if
it was actually ever sent. He says less
we did gang stuff for 15 years.
>> Gang stuff.
>> Gang stuff. Not clear what it means. Is
it sexual? Is it something else? And
then goes, "Well, we know we don't want
Abigail, your wife, to find out about
it."
>> Wow. So, he's reinforcing in these
messages
the friendship
but in a way that says very clearly
I could become your foe and we both know
I've got the goods to hurt you.
>> Yeah. A final question about this.
This is to all three of you. Do we know
if Epstein ever delivered on those
implied threats? "I'm going to let your
wife know." And did he? "I'm going to
report you to the IRS cuz I know you're
a potential tax fraud." Did he ever
follow through? I don't think we do
know.
I don't think we do. I mean
clearly at times he conveyed it to the
people he was he was saying it to, but
did he go beyond that? His power was in
its Yeah, I think it was enough to sort
of suggest it.
>> these people were aware of what was had
on them. But that's one of the
challenges with these emails. You can't
really see what came before or what came
after. And that's one of the challenges
of reporting on it. You have to read
what's in front of you and make sure
you're not inferring too much, but also
we're still trying to put together the
pieces as to how all these line up and
what the chronology is and what the end
result was. It's really difficult to
tell. Right. This is what it means to be
sifting through 3 million documents.
We won't know until we get the next one.
And I really think we still are very
much at the beginning even though it's
been over a week since we got these
documents. And just remember what we see
here are his emails and some texts.
A few recordings of phone calls. For the
most part we are only seeing a sliver of
his communication with all these people
and we can't see what he said one-on-one
in a private room or on the telephone
most of the time.
>> [music]
>> Okay. Well, when we come back after a
break,
we're going to turn to what these
documents are exposing about the very
provable lies
that people are telling about [music]
their relationship with Jeffrey Epstein
and when it ended. We'll be right back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Deborah Matt and Nick, I want to turn to
the unusual way in which this set of
Epstein documents has proven people very
publicly to have been dishonest. Nick,
you have been focused on this question
in particular. So, can you tell us what
you found?
Well, it's hard to find anyone who will
ever have admitted that they were close
friends with him and liked him.
Uh what we instead have found over the
years is that all these influential
people
for whom we knew some fragment of their
connection with Epstein, would always
say
I never liked him.
I cut off contact. I knew him through
business. I knew him through a friend.
Always minimizing their connection with
him. And then all of a sudden 3 million
documents come out.
And we can see the truth
of their closeness for all these people.
I'll give you an example.
Elon Musk, as recently as last
September, Elon Musk didn't just deny
visiting Epstein's island. He framed his
decision as an act of principle. He said
Epstein, quote, "tried to get me to his
island and I refused." All caps.
But back in 2012, these documents show,
he seemed eager to go. And he wrote to
Epstein, "What day/night will be the
wildest party on your island?" Wow. That
is beyond a direct contradiction.
Exactly. Here's one more. Howard
Lutnick, the Commerce Secretary, told a
similar narrative on a podcast again
last year. Massage table in the middle
of your house?
>> [laughter]
>> How often do you have a massage?
And he says,
"Every day." And then he like gets like
weirdly close to me. Ooh.
>> And he says, "And the right kind of
massage."
>> Lutnick described being so revolted by a
mid-2000s visit to Epstein's Manhattan
mansion. My wife and I decided that I
will never be in the room with that
disgusting person ever again. He even
claimed I was never in the room for him
socially, for business, or even
philanthropy. So, publicly claiming 2005
and on, nothing. Yeah. Except, we see in
the documents seven years later
he invests in a privately held company
with Epstein. Wow. And he appears to
visit Epstein's famous private island.
We can see them making travel plans that
year
for Lutnick and his family to visit the
island, the island on which this guy now
is famous for abusing
>> young women.
>> Right. And then after the date of the
planned visit, we see an email from an
Epstein assistant
forwarding a message to Lutnick from
from Epstein, "Nice seeing you." And
we're not just talking emails where they
shared niceties, we're talking about, as
Nick said, a business deal. Business
deals have paper trails. There must have
been some sort of calculation in all of
these people's heads as these documents
started trickling out that they thought,
"I can just keep denying it and I won't
get caught." I mean,
that to me is what's so stunning about
all the evidence in these documents. It
was always there on paper. Another good
example is this billionaire New York
real estate mogul, Andrew Farkas, who
I've been tracking really carefully.
>> Not a household name, but a very big
deal.
>> Yes, exactly. Not a household name, but
a very influential billionaire in New
York who's also a very powerful
political donor. He's been a huge backer
of Andrew Cuomo. He's friends with
Donald Trump. He was friends with
Jeffrey Epstein for over a decade, and
they were were partners. And he actually
went, it appears, to great pains to
conceal the fact that they were business
partners. He ended up co-owning a marina
in St. Thomas, the closest marina to
Jeffrey Epstein's private island, and he
>> Wexner visited? Yes, exactly. And the
closest way to get there on a smaller
boat is from this marina, American Yacht
Harbor, that the two of them owned
together. What does Farka's publicly say
about their relationship, and what's the
truth? Well, how far back do you want to
go? He never said a word about it, that
the fact that they were co-owners. It
only came out because someone had a
deposition in 2018, and Jeffrey
Epstein's name came out. And after he
died in prison, what Farka's said was
what a lot of powerful men have said,
"I didn't really know the guy. We were
just business partners. Our relationship
never went further than that." And with
each document reveal, we've started to
see the curtain peel back a bit more.
And with this final reveal, it's
undeniable. They were very, very good
friends.
Andrew Farka's opened up to Jeffrey
Epstein about his fears of loneliness
when his marriage was ending,
>> Wow. about his struggles with the fact
that his father was dying,
about things that you really only share
with a very, very close personal friend.
And in addition, not only were they in
business in the marina, he was
suggesting other business ventures many
years after Jeffrey Epstein's conviction
in Florida. And what I found
particularly interesting in my reporting
is the first time I contacted Andrew
Farka's about this, he denied it. And
each denial got a little more qualified
until finally with this last story that
I did just yesterday,
all he said was, "I regret my
association with him." He actually
finally stopped denying it because the
evidence is simply too clear. They were
very good friends, and the business
relationship was only a byproduct, not
the other way around.
What's remarkable about what you're
describing is how many people believed
that the statements they issued, these
boilerplate statements they issued years
ago about what they
didn't know, and that they weren't close
to Epstein, that these documents are
just obliterating Yeah. those
statements. An email is forever, and the
proof here, it's undeniable.
When these people were communicating,
they clearly never thought these
communications would see the light of
day. Right.
And yet
accountability has been one of the most
distinctive features of the fallout from
this latest
set of documents.
And we're just seeing high-powered
person after high-powered person, not
just being forced to account for
how they misled the public about
Epstein, but in some cases they're
losing their jobs.
I would say some, Michael, right? So,
Brad Karp, uh the head of Paul Weiss, he
lost his job when it became clear that
he was much closer to Epstein uh than he
thought.
>> Right. Law firm. But then you take
someone like Kathy Ruemmler, who's the
top lawyer at Goldman Sachs. Uh she is
also revealed to have been much closer
to Epstein than her her past comments
have suggested. She's still in her job.
What we see is that in certain
institutions there's more accountability
than in others. Howard Lutnick seems in
no danger of losing his job as Commerce
Secretary at the moment. We see that in
European countries
there is a lot more fallout and a lot
more damage uh to men who have been
revealed to have been very close with
Epstein. Talk about that, Deborah. Yeah,
I mean, the difference in accountability
and the sense of the smear that this
would give you if you were attached to
it, when you look at just the US versus
the United Kingdom, for example, is
absolutely staggering. I mean, you start
with Prince Andrew, who is no longer
Prince Andrew. He's now Andrew
Mountbatten-Windsor because
>> even living in his home. No, he's He
literally he's lost his title, he's lost
his home, he's lost his reputation. I
think it's very fair to say he's lost
almost everything as a result of his
deep relationship with Jeffrey Epstein
and the fact that it's been shown
through documentation and testimony that
he abused women as part of his
relationship with him.
But now we also see that the Prime
Minister of the UK may very much
possibly lose his job as a result, and
many high-powered people around him have
been fired or forced to step down. Some
because they were close with Jeffrey
Epstein, and some simply because they
were involved in putting people in power
who were close to Jeffrey Epstein. So,
we're talking about a domino effect
where it's just degrees of separation,
and that alone is enough in the UK to
make people toxic. That is not what
we're seeing in the US in certain
sectors.
>> sectors that the tech world is one where
we've seen almost zero accountability. I
mean, there's been some public shaming
of people like Bill Gates and Elon Musk
and maybe Peter Thiel, but there's been
no ramifications for them in any real
world. And and quite frankly, these are,
if you want to talk about sheer power,
the most powerful people in the world
based on the value of how much money
they have, and they've had no
accountability. We haven't talked about
an incredibly important figure in all
this, and that's President Trump. What
do we learn about him from these
documents that we didn't already know?
Well, to answer your question, Michael,
it is important to keep in mind some
chronology here for the listeners,
right? Trump and Epstein were very close
friends in the late '80s and the 1990s
and a couple of years into the 2000s.
Epstein thought he was Trump's closest
friend. These documents, though,
come from after they had their falling
out in the mid-2000s.
So,
they aren't friends anymore.
The mentions we have of Trump in these
files really come in three categories.
It's either Epstein talking about Trump
with somebody else,
often criticizing him.
Witnesses in the Epstein investigation
who were mentioning Trump, and we'll
come back to that. And then tips that
came into the FBI in 2019, for example,
regarding Epstein that also had some
mention of Trump, and those tips are
uncorroborated for the most part. I
think if email had been wide use in the
1990s,
and if Trump was a guy who used email,
which he's not, we might know a lot more
about their friendship. But, let's also
remember, we already know quite a bit
about their friendship.
For the better part of two decades, they
were very close, and their friendship
was based almost entirely on a shared
interest in women and sexual conquest.
That's what they did together. They
chased women, they talked about sex,
about women's bodies, about who they had
slept with. They bragged, they were
wingmen at parties and pageants at
Mar-a-Lago,
in Manhattan, in Atlantic City. Trump
once groped Epstein's girlfriend in
front of him as if it was a game.
And Epstein introduced Trump to at least
some of the women who would later accuse
Epstein of abusing them. Now, we don't
have any knowledge that Trump was
implicated in any of Epstein's criminal
activities.
But we know all these other facts Right.
>> about their overlap in their friendship.
So, the fact that there's not a ton of
new insight from these documents
doesn't change, and in many people's
minds diminish what we already knew
about the depth of their relationship.
>> I don't think so.
The Clintons
are at this very moment preparing to
testify before Congress about Jeffrey
Epstein.
And Bill Clinton's association with him
is reasonably well-known.
I don't know if the three of you have
spent a lot of time looking into the
Clinton dynamics in these documents,
but to the degree you have, what do you
know?
Well, in terms of Hillary, there's not a
lot there. And the fact of her being
called to testify is mainly just because
she's Hillary Clinton.
>> Right. And the Republicans have always
been fascinated with Hillary Clinton.
There's no doubt with President Clinton,
there's evidence now that Ghislaine had
a bigger role in helping to set
Ghislaine Maxwell setting up the Clinton
Global Initiative. This is the
president's marquee
public philanthropic initiative after
the presidency. It was what he did for
his job after he left office.
>> Fascinating that Ghislaine Maxwell was
central to establishing it.
>> Yeah, I mean, basically with Epstein and
and Clinton, it was like going on these
trips. There was a famous trip to South
Africa where they went and they took
people and we know there've been reports
that there were young women on the
plane. There's no evidence of anything,
any kind of sexual wrongdoing, anything
criminally improper. It's more again,
what we see with so many times of this
bad judgment
of hanging out with someone who you've
been warned about is someone you should
avoid. Got it. Well, I think that's
where I'd like to end this conversation.
Because here we are talking about former
presidents,
current and former CEOs, billionaires,
ambassadors,
law firm chairmans,
and they're communicating with Jeffrey
Epstein, they're reliant on him, they're
advising him, they're sharing
intimacies, Deborah, as you said, with
him. And in seeing all of this laid
bare, even in these early stages of
getting through 3 million documents,
you can see how much,
and check me if you think I'm wrong
here, the conspiracy theories that we
heard about for years and years and
years and that were dismissed as, you
know, hairbrained,
they were scratching at something really
real about the way that elites behave
when they don't think any of us are
looking.
I mean, these documents are an x-ray of
the global elite, how it's
interconnected,
how it's isolated,
how money buys anything.
It buys your way out of any trouble.
It buys your way out of almost any
scandal.
A man who was convicted of soliciting a
girl
remained the toast of the town in
Manhattan for years until he was
arrested again. It was no obstacle to
socializing, to movie premieres, to
invitations to fancy events, or to the
intimacy that Deborah and Matt have been
talking about with these powerful
people. It did not give them any
apparent qualms
that he was this person. And can I add
to that that what you see here also is I
think elite society at the end of the
day, while they knew he was a registered
sex offender and they were aware that he
had pled guilty to soliciting
prostitution from a minor girl and
that's a key part of what they knew. It
was easy for them to discard these young
girls as basically they were just
prostitutes. If it wasn't Epstein, it
would have been somebody else. Why? His
crimes didn't matter because of who the
crimes were perpetrated against.
>> Because these women didn't matter.
Right. And and they were girls that
yeah, they were girls. They were girls
that didn't matter. They were basically
disposable people that they didn't care
about. And the irony is a lot of these
elites are people who we would call
progressives and having very liberal
views and firstly enlightened views on
women and it really shows a real level
of hypocrisy. Hm. It's also a really
interesting look at how these elite
people, these extremely powerful people
were played by Jeffrey Epstein. The way
that he became this puppet master just
holding all of them on a string. He was
able to dangle the things that they
wanted most in life, not just sex, but
also all the things they open up to him
about and they really felt
for so long that they were infallible.
Hm. And for some of them there may never
be real accountability, but there is
some sort of accountability that's
happening right now because there's a
public reckoning. We are reading their
intimate thoughts in the New York Times.
We are publishing photographs that they
never thought would see the light of
day.
>> them speaking in vulgar terms about
women.
>> Yes, these are things they never thought
would be aired. They never believed in a
million years that this would reach the
public. They didn't think they were
people who could be touched, but there
is a paper trail and now we have it and
they have fallen into that and it is a
reckoning of a sort.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Well, Deborah,
Matt, Nick,
thank you guys very much. Thank you.
Thank you for having us.
Ms. Maxwell, did you and Jeffrey Epstein
attempt to surround yourselves with
influential individuals to curry favor
and shield yourselves from potential
scrutiny?
I invoke my Fifth Amendment right to
silence. On Monday afternoon, Epstein's
long-time companion, Ghislaine Maxwell,
who is serving a federal prison sentence
on sex trafficking charges,
refused to answer questions during a
deposition before Congress.
Instead, [music] she invoked her Fifth
Amendment right against
self-incrimination
in response [music] to every question.
Meanwhile, Well, that was an interesting
experience. It was.
A few hours later, the two congressmen
who have led the efforts to force the
Trump administration to release the
Epstein files,
Republican Thomas Massie of Kentucky
>> [music]
>> and Democrat Ro Khanna of California,
were given a chance to review unredacted
copies of the latest Epstein files. We
went in there for two hours. There's
millions of files, right? And in a
couple of hours, we found six men whose
names have been redacted who are
implicated in the way that the files are
presented. Both lawmakers criticized the
Department of Justice
>> [music]
>> for redacting the names of six
associates of Epstein who, they said,
appeared to have engaged in criminal
conduct.
One of them, according to Massie, is a
high-ranking official
>> [music]
>> in a foreign government.
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
[music]
And as a doctor, your your message to
people about the measles vaccine is
>> Take the vaccine, please. We have a
solution for our problem. A top US
health official is urging Americans
[music] to get vaccinated against the
measles, issuing one of the strongest
endorsements yet from the Trump
administration. Asked by CNN [music]
about the measles outbreak that is
raging in South Carolina,
>> [music]
>> Dr. Mehmet Oz was far more forceful in
calling for vaccination [music] than the
Secretary of Health and Human Services,
Robert F. Kennedy Jr., a long-time
skeptic of vaccines.
>> [music]
>> And
We believe our mom is still out there.
We need your help. On Monday, the Today
[music] show anchor, Savannah Guthrie,
issued a plea for the public's help in
finding her 84-year-old mother, Nancy
[music] Guthrie, whose disappearance
over a week ago is being investigated as
a kidnapping. No matter where you are,
even if you're far from Tucson,
if you see anything, you hear [music]
anything, if there's anything at all
that seems strange to you,
that you report to law enforcement.
We are at an hour of desperation.
Local police say that blood [music]
found on Nancy Guthrie's front porch was
hers, and that a doorbell camera at her
home had been disconnected [music] and
removed. But so far, police say they
have few leads about her location.
Today's [music] episode was produced by
Mary Wilson, Michael Simon Johnson, and
Shannon Lynn. It was edited by Brendan
[music] Klinkenberg and Rachel Quester,
contains music by Chelsea Daniel and Dan
[music] Powell, and was engineered by
Chris Wood.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Michael
Barbaro. See you tomorrow.